Welcome to the NCTraCS tutorial series.
The topic of this presentation is about R-squared and adjusted R-squared.
There are key metrics for assessing how well a regression model fits the data, and understanding them is essential in regression analysis.
As a reminder, our motivating example is to investigate whether smoking reduces lung function.
Forced Vital Capacity was measured in 100 men,
of whom 36 were smokers and 64 were non-smokers.
We have the statistics of these two groups, including mean,
standard deviation, standard error, listed in the table. R squared is a statistical measure that shows
the proportion of variance in the response variable that can be explained by the independent variables in the model.
It indicates how well the model fits the data.
In the example of lung function and smoker study.
We are asking if smoking status is associated with low lung function.
Here, the FVC is the response variable, or we call it the dependent variable.
There are independent variables, or we call predictors including the smoking status that we believe
might influence lung function.
For example,
the smoking status represents whether an individual is a smoker or not.
If they are a smoker,
we use one to indicate the status, and if not,
we use zero. And of course,
there could be other independent variables that we are interested in, such as age,
gender, etc.
The formula of R squared is that, one minus the sum of squares of residuals divided by the total sum of squares.
The numerator SSR represents the variation not explained by the model.
While the denominator SST represents the total variation in the response variable.
The value of R squared ranges from 0 to 1.
When R squared equals zero,
it means the model explains none of the variability in the response data.
And while when R square equals one,
it means the model explains
all of the variability in the response data. Higher values of R squared indicate a
better fit of the model to the data.
For example,
an R squared of 0.8 suggests that 80% of the variability in the response variable can be explained
by the predictor variables in the model.
However, a higher R-squared value does not always mean a better model.
Sometimes, adding more predictors can artificially inflate R squared even if the additional
variables do not actually improve the model.
So we use a modified version of r-squared, which is called the adjusted r-squared, to finalize the
addition of irrelevant predictors.
The adjusted R squared is a modified version of the R squared that finalizes the audition of irrelevant predictors.
Unlike R squared, it does not automatically increase when more predictors are added to the model.
Adjusted r square can sometimes decrease if a predictor does not contribute significantly to the model's explantory
power. Here is the formula of the adjusted R squared.
It equals one minus one minus R squared times N minus one divided by N minus P minus
one. Here,
N is the number of observations, and P is the number of predictors.
So you can see when P decreases when n is unchanged, adjusted r-squared decreases as well.
The main reason that we use adjusted elsewhere includes, first, adjusted r-squared
accounts for the number of predictors relative to the number of observations,
providing a more reliable metric of model fit.
Secondly, it is particularly useful when comparing models with different numbers of predictors as it penalizes overfitting
by adjusting the number of variables.
Here is the comparison of these two metrics. R squared increases or remains the same as more
predictors are added while adjusted R squared only increases if the new predictor improves the model fit more than
would be expected by chance.
Using the dataset from the FVC example,
as we talked before,
we established two models.
Here, FVC is our dependent variable or response variable, and smoking status is the main independent
variable or predictor variable.
The random noise predictor is an unnecessary predictor that does not actually explain
FVC. The model one, you can see, only has the smoking status predictor
in the model. While model two has
the other random predictor in the model.
From the results, we can see the R squared are the same for these two models.
While the adjusted R squared accounts for the unnecessary predictor and adjusts downwards for model two, showing
that adding a random predictor does not actually improve the model.
One thing to note is that this is just a simple example with synthetic data and the R squared and
adjusted R squared values are relatively small here in the table.
And in real-world applications,
we typically expect these values to be higher,
often over 80%, to consider the model reliable and effective.
However, the acceptable level of R squared can vary based on the
concept and the complexity of the data being modeled.
The takeaway message is that both R squared and adjusted R squared are helpful metrics,
but R squared can be misleading sometimes, when predictors are added to a model, as it always increases or
stays the same. And adjusted R squares
give a more reliable model,
give a more reliable measure of the model fit by penalizing unnecessary predictors.
It only increases if the new predictor actually improves the model's explainatory power.
Thank you for your attention. I will see you in the next video.